I want a good, competent developer not necessarily a rock star
##############################################################
:date: 2014-03-04 17:11
:author: MichaelHughes
:category: Uncategorized
:tags: philosophy
:slug: i-want-a-good-competent-developer-not-necessarily-a-rock-star
:status: published

Something about describing a developer as a rock star is slightly off
putting. Maybe it's because when I think of rock stars the phrase
"temperamental divas" comes to mind or maybe it's because I never really
understand what it means.

| [caption id="attachment\_70" align="aligncenter" width="400"]\ |Rwk
  start license plate -- Photo By gammaman / CC By 2.0| Maybe it means
  this --
| Photo By `gammaman <http://www.flickr.com/photos/gammaman/>`__ / `CC
  By 2.0 <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/>`__\ [/caption]

I think that I understand the intent. Technology firms and start ups
really want talented motivated individuals who love what they do to
apply for positions. The same phrases (talented, motivated, etc) could
also be applied to members of popular bands and pop sensations. It just
also happens that a number of other positive (or negative) adjectives
may apply to a really popular musician but not to a good team software
developer. At my employer very few projects are completed by solo
developers.

The majority of our projects are sufficiently complex that they require
multiple developers and a project manager. Like many others before this
post I'll echo a common sentiment--A developer's value is significantly
diminished if he or she cannot work (or learn to work) well in a team
environment. Excellent team skills areÂ \ **not** necessarily *always* a
requirement, there are enough single person ISVs and one-man dev teams
behind successful app store games to show that. On the bigger corporate
projects that my employer handles, however teams of 3-5 people are
needed to handle the complexity of given requirements and delivery
deadlines.

My point about teamwork and how rock stars somehow are not good team
contributors is a `straw man <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straw_man>`__
though. The real point is that putting the phrase "rock star" in a job
description is imprecise and in some cases could be perceived badly.
Because "rock star" is so imprecise I could say it means someone who is
naturally talented with little training, or someone how works extremely
hard on his or her craft, or some who is a loner with a bunch
manufactured hype.

That's all for now--Just try to avoid the phrase 'rock star' in
recruiting descriptions.

.. |Rwk start license plate -- Photo By gammaman / CC By 2.0| image:: http://codinginthetrenches.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/4935305381_b2c9929817_b-e1417402364408.jpg
   :class: wp-image-70 size-full
   :width: 400px
   :height: 267px
   :target: http://codinginthetrenches.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/4935305381_b2c9929817_b.jpg
