+++
date = "2017-04-02T15:24:44-06:00"
title = "Things to considering when writing streams"
author = "Michael Hughes"
images = []
draft = true
menu = ""
description = "A set of notes on things we've run into while writing streaming applications."
categories = ["data","software-design"]
tags = ["design", "tips"]

+++

Over the last year at work and sometimes at home I have involvement in either planning or building systems designed
to process messages at speed in a (unreliable) cloud environment. The following are some thoughts and advice based
on my personal experience in writing streaming applications.

<!--more-->

Internet of Things (IoT) seems to have replaced cloud as the buzz word phrase of the time. Regardless of whether the phrase
means anything new or not, one take away is there are more devices now than a decade ago that can emit small bits of information
over time. It could be as simple as a temperature sensor that emits the temparate at the top of every hour or as complex as a cellular
phone emitting its current network status, location, charge state, and other data.

The point is that we have lots of things that emit data over time and we often want to do something useful with that data in (near) real time. Again,
it could be as simple as updating a web page with the current temporate or as complex as a cullular carrier's network status dashboard that 
indicates the health of their network based on connected device data. These examples are all tied together by a idea that a set of
software has to accept the incoming data, process it, potentially store it, and then forward it onwards elsewhere.
